.TH RSYNCRYPTO_RECOVER 1 "May 13, 2008" "Lingnu Open Source Consulting" "Rsyncrypto_recover User Manual"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.SH NAME
rsyncrypto_recover \- recover all usable data from corrupted rsyncrypto filemaps
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rsyncrypto_recover
.IB badfile " > " goodfile
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents the \fBrsyncrypto_recover\fP command.
.PP
When the \fBrsyncrypto\fP command is used with the \fB\-\-name\-encrypt\fP command,
a file containing the mapping from the plain text representation to the encrypted
file names is formed. This file mapping has a strict format of records delimited
by a NULL byte.
.PP
A bug introduced in version 1.07 or \fBrsyncrypto\fP, and solved in version 1.09,
caused this file to be somewhat corrupted under certain circumstances, most notably
the use of the \fB\-\-delete\-keys\fP command line option.
.PP
It is important to note that the only records corrupted are records that were due
to be deleted anyways. \fBThis bug did not result in any loss of actual important data.\fP
It did, however, leave behind a file that \fBrsyncrypto\fP then refused to open.
.PP
\fBrsyncrypto_recover\fP will read in a file map, and output to the standard output
only those records that are valid.
.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.I badfile
A file map that contains some good and some corrupted records.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rsyncrypto (1)
.SH AUTHOR
rsyncrypto was written by Shachar Shemesh for Lingnu Open Source Consulting ltd.
http://www.lingnu.com
.PP
This manual page was written by Shachar Shemesh <shachar@debian.org>
.SH PROJECT HOMEPAGE
http://rsyncrypto.lingnu.com
